doc: initial design proposal (#2)
filecoin-station/piece-indexer: docs/design.md

`Label` field. Only `PieceCID`. We need to find a different solution to support
these deals.

In the longer term, we want IPNI to provide a reverse lookup functionality that
will allow clients like Spark to request a sample of payload block CIDs
associated with the given ContextID or PieceCID, see the
[design proposal for InterPlanetary Piece Index](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1jhvP48ccUltmCr4xmquTnbwfTSD7LbO1i1OVil04T2w).

To cover the gap until the InterPlanetary Piece Index is live, we want to
implement a lightweight solution that can serve as a stepping stone between
Label-based CID discovery and full Piece Index sampling.

### High-Level Idea

Let's implement a lightweight IPNI ingester that will process the advertisements
from Filecoin SPs and extract the list of `(ProviderID, PieceCID, PayloadCID)`
entries. Store these entries in a Postgres database. Provide a REST API endpoint
accepting `(ProviderID, PieceCID)` and returning a single `PayloadCID`.

#### Notes

Pieces are immutable. If we receive an advertisement saying that a payload block
CID was found in a piece CID, then this information remains valid forever, even

> after the SP advertise that they are no longer storing that block. This means

Author: Yes, we should not make any retrievals for such payload.

I am envisioning the following architecture:

1. A piece indexer I describe in this document. It will be eventually replaced by a proper IPNI reverse index solution.
2. A deal tracker - a component that listens for actor events and builds a list of active deals - conceptually a list of pairs `(piece_cid, miner_id)`. We will need to build this. 

When Spark build a list of tasks for the current round, it will ask the deal tracker for 1000 active deals. This ensures we test retrieval for active deals only.

When Spark checker tests retrieval, it will first consult the piece indexer to convert deal's `piece_cid` to a payload CID to retrieve.

It's ok if the piece indexer stores data for expired deals, because Spark is not going to ask for that data. 

Of course, storing expired deals unnecessarily increases storage requirements, but since we want to run this service only for 2-6 months, I think it's fine.

our indexer can ignore `IsRm` advertisements.

The indexer protocol does not provide any guarantees about the list of CIDs

> advertised for the same Payload CID. Different SPs can advertise different lists

Author: ```suggestion
advertised for the same Piece CID. Different SPs can advertise different lists
```

> advertised for the same Payload CID. Different SPs can advertise different lists

Author: Great catch, @patrickwoodhead!

(e.g. the entries can be ordered differently) or can even cheat and submit CIDs
that are not part of the Piece. Our indexer must scope the information to each

> index provider.

Author: The index provider is the actor submitting data to the index. Typically, Boost and Venus Droplet. 

@patrickwoodhead 
How can I improve the text to make this easier to understand?

> index provider.

Reviewer: Is "index provider" _the_ term to use? If so, I don't think this needs to be clearer up. Maybe we could add the term definition to a definition section in this document?

> index provider.

Author: The term "index provider" is used by IPNI:
- https://github.com/ipni/index-provider
- https://github.com/MarcoPolo/http-index-provider-example

However, the spec uses just "provider" 🤷🏻‍♂️ 

https://github.com/ipni/specs/blob/90648bca4749ef912b2d18f221514bc26b5bef0a/IPNI.md#terminology
> **Publisher**: This is an entity that publishes advertisements and index data to an indexer. It is usually, but not always, the same as the data provider. A publisher is identified by a libp2p peer ID.

> index provider.

Author: I like the idea of adding a section to explain the terminology 👍🏻

- **`Entries`** provide a paginated list of multihashes. For our purposes, it's
  enough to take the first entry and ignore the rest.

Advertisements are made available for consumption by indexer nodes as a set of
files fetched via HTTP.

Quoting from
[Advertisement Transfer](https://github.com/ipni/specs/blob/90648bca4749ef912b2d18f221514bc26b5bef0a/IPNI.md#advertisement-transfer):

> All IPNI HTTP requests use the IPNI URL path prefix, `/ipni/v1/ad/`. Indexers
> and advertisement publishers implicitly use and expect this prefix to precede
> the requested resource.
>
> The IPLD objects of advertisements and entries are represented as files named
> by their CIDs in an HTTP directory. These files are immutable, so can be
> safely cached or stored on CDNs. To fetch an advertisement or entries file by
> CID, the request made by the indexer to the publisher is
> `GET /ipni/v1/ad/{CID}`.

The IPNI instance running at https://cid.contact provides an API returning the
list of all index providers from which cid.contact have received announcements:

https://cid.contact/providers

The response provides all the metadata we need to download the advertisements:

> - `Publisher.Addrs` describes where we can contact SP's index provider

Author: I think it doesn't have to be an HTTP address; it could be a Graphsync/libp2p address, too.

However, there is a push from IPNI to move to HTTP transport. For our lighweight indexer, we will require SPs to support the HTTP protocol for handling indexer requests.

Unfortunately, this requires SPs to tweak their Boost configuration and provide the public hostname at which Boost can be reached from outside. On the bright side, I think it's most likely that SPs have to configure this option anyways if they want cid.contact to receive their advertisements, in which case our lightweight indexer is not adding any new requirements.

https://boost.filecoin.io/configuration/http-indexer-announcement

> - `Publisher.Addrs` describes where we can contact SP's index provider

Author: I reworded this item as follows:

> `Publisher.Addrs` describes where we can contact SP's index provider to retrieve content for CIDs, e.g., advertisements.

> - `LastAdvertisement` contains the CID of the head advertisement

Author: It's the last advertisement for a specific SP.

All fields described in this section are per-provider.

How can I improve the text to make this more clear?

> - `LastAdvertisement` contains the CID of the head advertisement

Reviewer: What about

> The response provides all the metadata we need to download the advertisements:

->

> The response provides all the per-SP metadata we need to download the advertisements:

> - `LastAdvertisement` contains the CID of the head advertisement

Author: Reworded as follows:

```md
The response provides all the metadata we need to download the advertisements.
For each index provider, the response includes:

- `Publisher.Addrs` describes where we can contact SP's index provider to
  retrieve content for CIDs, e.g., advertisements.
- `LastAdvertisement` contains the CID of the head advertisement from the SP
```

## Proposed Design

### Ingestion

Ingesting announcements from all Storage Providers is the most complex
component. For each storage provider, we need to periodically check for the
latest advertisement head and process the chain from head until we find an
advertisement we have already processed before. The chain can be very long,
therefore we need to account for the cases when the service restarts or a new

> head is published before we finish processing the chain.

Author: It's enough to process these new events after we finish the currently-in-progress walk of the advertisement chain from the provider. 

However, we need to keep track of where we started walking the advertisement chain from and whether we finished the processing (and can start walking from the new head) or whether we are still walking from the previous head.

#### Proposed algorithm

Use the following per-provider state persisted in the database:

- `provider_id` - Primary key.

- `provider_address` - Provider's address where we can fetch advertisements
  from.

- `last_head` - The CID of the head where we started the previous walk. All

>   advertisements from `last_head` to the end of the chain were already

Author: That's an interesting question! 

Generally, we need to process all advertisements up to the genesis.

I imagine there could be edge cases where, at some point, all older entries are for deals that have expired; therefore, we can stop the walk there. However, since deals have different durations, it's entirely possible to have an expired deal (e.g. created in May with 6 months length) followed by an active deal (e.g. created in April with 12-month length).

I'd rather play this safe and walk the chain up to the genesis.

>   advertisements from `last_head` to the end of the chain were already
>   processed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  advertisements from `last_head` to the end of the chain have already
  been processed.
```

> - `next_head` - The CID of the most recent head seen by cid.contact. This is

Reviewer 2: how does `next_head` differ from `head`? Do we not start each walk from the current head?

Author: The initial walk will take a long time to complete. While we are walking the "old" chain, new advertisements (new heads) will be announced to IPNI.

- `next_head` is the latest head announced to IPNI
- `head` is the advertisement where the current walk-in-progress started

I suppose we don't need to keep track of `next_head`. When the current walk finishes, we will wait up to one minute until we make another request to cid.contact to find what are the latest heads for each SPs.

In my current proposal, when the current walk finishes, we can immediately continue with walking from the `next_head`.

Author: See also the diagram in https://github.com/filecoin-station/piece-indexer/pull/2/files#r1689884939

Author: I captured my explanation in the design doc.

  where we need to start the next walk from.

- `head` - The CID of the head advertisement we started the current walk from.

>   We update this value whenever we start a new walk.

Reviewer: Why do we need this state? Should it not be enough to go from next_head to last_head and afterwards update last_head?

Or is this for the case where this takes a long time and we want to be able to resume the chain walk? In this case, what about we simplify the design by saying that we will only ever walk X links per iteration, thereby eliminating the need for the `head` state?

Reviewer: Then we could also remove `tail`

Author: The current walk starts from `head` and walks up to `last_head`. When the current walk reaches `last_head`, we need to set `last_head ← head` so that the next walk knows where to stop.

`next_head` is updated every minute when we query cid.contact for the latest heads. If the walk takes longer than a minute to finish, then `next_head` will change and we cannot use it for `last_head`.

What we can do, is to remove `next_head`, as I explained in https://github.com/filecoin-station/piece-indexer/pull/2/files#r1689865074

> In this case, what about we simplify the design by saying that we will only ever walk X links per iteration, thereby eliminating the need for the head state?

We must always walk the chain all the way to the genesis or to the entry we have already seen & processed. Here is how the state looks like in the middle of a walk:

```
next_head
  ↓
(entries announced after we started the current walk)
  ↓
head
  ↓
(entries visited in this walk)
  ↓
tail
  ↓
(entries NOT visited yet)
  ↓
last_head
  ↓
(entries visited in the previous walk)
  ↓
(null)
```

- `tail` - The CID of the next advertisement in the chain that we need to
  process in the current walk.

> Every minute, fetch the latest providers from cid.contact. For each provider

Reviewer 2: Each minute, we are running an algorithm that has a complexity of the order of the number of providers. Do we have any concerns about how much processing we will be doing each minute? Might this process take more than a minute to run?

Reviewer: What about with one minute delay between every run?

Author: I think this should be fine. Every minute, we need to do these three steps:

1. Run a SQL query to get the `next_head` for each SP
2. Make one HTTP call to cid.contact to find the latest advertisement heads announced by all SPs
3. Run one SQL query to update `next_head` for all SPs where there is a new head
4. Kick-off advertisement walks (up to one walk per provider). These walks are executed in the background and don't block this loop.

Author: I updated the spec to capture my explanation.

found, fetch the state from the database and run the following algorithm (using

> the name `new_head` for the CID of the latest advertisement).

Reviewer: I believe there's a step 0 missing:

Fetch https://cid.contact/providers, for each provider:

Reviewer: What's coming below reads like this is global state and not per SP

Reviewer: I will continue review once this was cleared up 🙏

Author: I reworked this section for more clarity, PTAL.

requests.

The design outlined in the previous section divides the ingestion process into
small steps that can be scheduled and executed independently. This allows us to
avoid the complexity of managing long-running per-provider tasks and instead
repeatedly execute one step of the process.

Loop 1: Every minute, fetch the latest provider information from cid.contact and
update the persisted state as outlined above.

Loop 2: Discover walks in progress and make one step in each walk.

1. Find all provider state records where `tail != null`.

2. For each provider, execute one step as described above. We can execute these
   steps in parallel. Since each parallel job will query a different provider,
   we are not going to overload any single provider.

3. Optionally, we can introduce a small delay before the next iteration. I think
   we won't need it because the time to execute SQL queries should create enough
   delay.

### REST API

Implement the following endpoint that will be called by Spark checker nodes. The
endpoint will sign the response using the server's private key to allow
spark-evaluate to verify the authenticity of results reported by checker nodes:

```

> GET /sample/{providerId}/{pieceCid}?seed={seed}

Reviewer 2: can we add an endpoint that allows a SP to see which records there are in the DB associated to them? As per F8 Ptrk's comment a week or so back

Author: See the "Observability" section below. Do you think we need something different?
